Okay.
And we're rolling.
Good.
So we're talking to Dr. John Ittelson.
Is that how you pronounce your name, sir?
That's correct.
It's I-T-T-E-L-S-O-N.
Okay.
I think I explained to you yesterday briefly what I'm working on.
And of particular, of course, it's funny when you just called, I was working on the prologue for this new book, which really shows how confident I am that I think I've got to
I've got an idea of where I'm going with it, but I'm really interested in a continuum of books and libraries and book people, hoping to, planning to have some chapters that suggest and document libraries through history, book people through history, book culture.
And what's very, very interesting to me is not only books in national libraries and public libraries and institutional libraries, but also you have these rare instances
where you have a brand new university just formed within the last four or five years, where it doesn't have a tradition like Harvard that goes back 370 years of maintaining a library.
What do you do?
How do you go about this?
And I think you're kind of in a...
Quite an unusual situation, and you could probably give me some pretty good insights on your experience out there, the philosophy that you have, the importance of the library, not just the library, but also the technological materials that you clearly have.
determined are very important to your mission, then I guess that's where I want to say that.
That's kind of a general opening.
Maybe if we could just tick-tock a little bit, we could focus in on a few questions.
Let me just do a couple hits on it, and you can tell me when we're getting warm.
Good.
One, on the library, because we talked about that a little bit the last time when there were some press releases, I think, that talked about that our library wasn't going to have books, so it was going to be all electronic.
Right.
The campus, as I did mention, was sort of a campus of opportunity.
The Fort Ord base closed, and although it wasn't planned, it wasn't in the state's master plan to have a campus here.
They were trying to find out what was the appropriate use for the base and the idea of turning it into a...
or a portion of it, we have less than 4% of the old base.
Is that right?
Yeah.
The base is 46 square miles from San Francisco, and we have 1,365 acres, just under 4%.
1,065?
1,365.
365.
Yeah.
So what's happening to the rest of the stuff, just out of curiosity?
The rest of the stuff, there's 4,000 acres in the Bureau of Land Management.
there's another plot of land which is about the size of our campus that is designated as a research incubator by the UC system.
Have you ever been to Monterey?
I have several times.
So if you drive along Highway 1 on the
West side of the highway, you would see sand dunes that had target practice.
I remember it.
I was a naval officer out that way in the late 60s.
Well, where the rifle training was, they've just done a toxic cleanup of the lead, sort of getting the lead out, as it were.
And that's going to be eventually turned over as a state park.
Really?
So then part of the...
The land will be given over to the city of Marina, which is on one side of the base, part of the land given over to the city of Seaside.
And then some of the land will be designated for...
private use.
They're talking about building another golf course.
So the base is part of a reuse of the four-door.
What do you do with military bases when you don't need them?
But in doing that, the campus, since it wasn't even in the long-term master plan of the state system, there was a lot of thought going through, well, what should this campus be or become?
And it happened to turn out that we're the 21st campus.
in the CSU system, and we're coming along to 21st century, so I'm getting millennium out.
But one of our phrases was, you know, the 21st campus of the CSU system to prepare our students for the 21st century.
Can I just interject?
The CSU system, that's apart from, like, UCLA and Cal Berkeley and the others, or is that part of the CSU system?
You're an East Coaster, so you have to explain the California craziness.
California has had a tradition of a very strong public education sector, and it has a community college system of over 120 community colleges.
It has the CSU system, the California State University system, and that
about 25 years ago was sort of a coalescing of state teacher colleges that were around the state.
So we have San Diego State, San Francisco State, Sacramento State, Humboldt State.
Those were campuses that really existed before, and then campuses that have been added, California State University at Dominguez Hills, California State University Northridge.
It turns out that the California Maritime Academy now just is part of the California State University System.
So the California State University System is,
is part of the overall California State educational structure where you have community colleges, 120 or so of them that offer AA degrees, and any student who graduates from a high school can get into a community college.
Yeah, these are two-year degrees, right?
Two-year degrees.
Students who graduate with a B or better are automatically admitted to any of the California State University campuses, and those are four-year institutions.
primarily offering bachelor's degrees, but they also concur master's degrees.
I see.
Then you have the UC system, and that's your Berserkleys and the like.
There's, I think, nine campuses in the UC system.
UC Irvine, UC Santa Barbara.
Riverside.
And those are the four-year research institutions.
And then you have the private institutions, the Stanford's and the University of the... Caltech.
Those sorts of things.
Right.
Okay.
Our campus...
was not in the formal long-term planning.
And so a lot of community involvement, a lot of the educators in the CSU system, and generally, what should a campus be and what are we going to do?
And so the campus has a mission statement.
I've seen that on the net, by the way.
If you get onto the webpage, and that...
We've managed to make it be at least proper English.
I don't know if you read the George Will piece about our campus not too long ago.
No, I didn't.
Well, if you want, last weekend.
George Will did a piece of digging on our new campus.
Really?
Where was this published?
Washington Post.
I did a LexisNexis search.
It was interesting.
It didn't pop up.
It just came out.
George Will in last week's post, right?
What did he knock it for?
Aesthetics?
Well, that he could because it looks like an Army base.
Because it looks like an Army base, I guess, right now, right?
He knocked it because we have universities.
university learning requirement, we call it U.S.
histories with an S. And his concern was over political correctness and arbitrary language.
Basically, we are trying to be different.
And in being different, sometimes you're not as articulate as one probably needs to be.
And particularly if you have a whole campus that just is two and a half years old,
it's easy to find, you know, laws in the fabric.
But back to your initial question about the library.
Okay.
And where we say, so we're a new campus, we're reused, so we couldn't build a building from the ground up that was a library.
We had buildings that we had to renovate.
So as we're even thinking about, you know, what should a building be, what should be a learning space, how big should be a library,
the people who are doing the planning, we've really done a change here.
I'm sorry, they said what?
We've really got a change happening in our society right now.
Traditionally, the way you value the library, whether it's a Harvard or a Stanford, the first thing that comes up in the size of the library is the number of volumes it has.
The library has
and the academic academy serves as a repository of the scholarly work, and particularly in Ph.D.
training institutions, that's the home of rest for the thesis, which is the research.
But for, and many times at,
major universities, they'll sometimes have an undergraduate library.
Oh, yeah.
You know, this library has all the great works, all the books that an undergraduate student should have access and should be here 24 hours.
And then there's reserve rooms where people get stuff.
So really the issue here is... Special collections as well, of course.
Special collections as well.
But the issue here is access.
How do we get access to the information our students need?
And how do we do it with the limited financial resources we have?
And in this case, somewhat the limited space resources that we have.
Even if we had all the money in the world, we couldn't create this humongously large library.
So one thing that we did is that we were in an area where we had a number of community colleges, maybe postgraduate school, Santa Cruz not far away.
So we said, let's work out
very strong, truly working collaborative arrangements with the libraries that are in the area for access and access to materials that we may not have no matter what.
And interlibrary loan exists, but we said, let's not say interlibrary loan, it takes two weeks to get it.
Let's really figure out what does it take for our students to get access to the resources that are here.
It's a little bit when you see a Starbucks next to a New York bagel.
There are two different companies, but there was a synergy there that made sense.
So very early on, we made sure that our student library cards had all the privileges for the libraries that were physically in the area.
The second thing that we looked at is that we have to decide what periodicals or what subscriptions we want, because that's one of, again, the areas that students need to work.
So we had a choice between buying subscriptions to all these periodicals or buying access to them with the ability to let the students get the exact articles that they need.
And again, in our library, rather than doing as many...
periodical descriptions, what we did is got greater access, not only access to the reference material, but the permission to get the full printed document sent to us and the copyright fee and all that.
So our students really have greater access to an article out of a research journal than any other CSU, because
We're using our funds to pay for the access for the stuff that our students need, not necessarily paying the access for a journal that sits on a shelf until somebody happens to need it.
So it's a philosophical change, partly brought about because of, you know, confined resources in both finances and physical plant, but also in saying what is the problem we're trying to solve.
We're trying to make sure our students have the information they need
And we have methods where we can get things rapidly.
You know, students have come in, found something in Nexus and Lexis.
Our library ordered it.
It was electronically delivered, and they picked it up that day.
I don't know whether that answers.
Well, that's, yeah, that starts it.
But now also, on the website, there's also a collection policy, and it says very clearly, it says, to the extent possible and economically feasible, the CSUMB library uses electronic resources instead of print.
So that's the policy, that if it's available electronically,
That's what a priority is.
And that is kind of a philosophical position, too, wouldn't you say?
I mean, that you are saying, listen, if it's available.
I'm not taking a position on this, but clearly I think what you're suggesting here is that this is an institution for the 21st century.
We have the technology here.
It works.
It's available to us, and if it's available electronically, that will be the preferred medium.
Let me give you another sort of twist on why you're doing that.
One, you could say it's a philosophy.
Our campus is less than 4% of the old Fort Ord.
We have 1,500 students on our campus.
1,500 students, right?
1,500.
And for the water allocation that we have for our 3% of the former base, we have faculty and student and staff housing here.
We have 1,200 housing units.
So we have residential, not only students, but we have faculty and staff living here.
So we have, in our water allocation for the space that we have, the ability to grow to serving about 10,000 students on our physical footprint.
And is that the projection?
Well, the projection, though, is the state really feels that as we build a campus, this campus needs to serve about 25,000.
So there's a delta.
There's a major difference.
What did you call that again?
A delta, you know, a shift.
Okay.
So we have some 16,000 or 15,000 students that we say we want to serve, but they can't be here on campus.
We humorously refer to it as our toilet blessing problem.
We could have more students as long as they don't use the toilet.
So we have a very aggressive plan for what we call distributed learning, or students who participate with the campus without physically being on campus.
And that's our distance and online opportunities.
And by the year 2005, we want to have a...
the 1,500 of those students physically off campus.
By the year 2-0-0-5.
Yeah, our target is about 1,500 students.
About the same size we are now on campus.
We want to be off campus.
And this is also for the taking of classes?
This is for everything?
And this is where you can win, right?
Well, meeting the goals and objectives of doing what our mission is, to have students who are...
Multilingual.
We require second language competency.
We want them to be socially conscious.
Our students are required to do service learning activities.
We want our students to embrace diversity in a sense that we figure we're in a global society, not just a national society.
So if you go through the mission statement, we have these various missions.
You go through educational programs, and we want a student who may have decided to do a four-year residency program here to come out with the same competencies and outcomes than a student who might actually have spent only six months here and did the rest of their interactions with our faculty and our learning experiences through some mediated form, which required them not physically to be here on campus.
Okay.
Now, if you think about that, then it is obvious that our library wants to make sure wherever it can that has electronic materials available, because if we didn't have those materials available and we needed to serve a student wherever we can, if that student needed something, if we had electronic,
we could just send it out.
Where if it were a book, we're back to, you've got to put it into a box, you've got to ship it, you know, all those different things.
Chris, how many books are not available through electronic means?
I mean, thousands.
I mean, everything is not available electronically.
We know that.
Well, lots of things aren't available.
There's lots of things where we don't have that option.
That's my thing, too.
And that's where the question is,
There are certain things, historical documents, there's books that are out of print, there's all sorts of things that, there's the Gutenberg, you know, project, but it's far from complete.
Plus, it's also copyright sensitive, I mean.
Copyright sensitive, and there may be, you know, there's eight different versions of Moby Dick, and
Some of them are electronic, but some are only in print.
So the library's goal here is not, you know, and this is what got people in trouble with, well, we're only going to do electronic stuff.
No.
When it's available, that would be our preference.
When it's needed, we would get it for our students in whatever way it took.
Let's do that again.
When it's available, that will be our preference.
When it's needed,
What did you say?
We will assess it, you know, we'll provide it to our students in whatever way we can, which ranges from us buying it or us getting it through interlibrary loans.
See, right now we haven't established our distance learning program very aggressively.
We're just growing.
But the same sort of areas where we let our students access libraries that were not on our campuses but other campuses,
We may have to do a similar sort of thing.
If we have a student who happens to be in Chicago, we may need to come up with some sort of collaborative arrangement so that the student needs a library.
There's something we don't have electronically we can't get to them, but we know it's available at the Northwestern Library.
We may have to figure out what do we have to pay that university to give us access for our students.
Now, also on the website, it says print collections, 34,000 books.
That's pretty small.
Would you agree that that's pretty small?
We think it's real small.
Smaller than, you know, despite what we say, that's smaller than what we would like it to be.
And that's a pretty accurate figure, right?
About 34,000, I guess.
No, no.
You'll have to look at the bottom of the web page to see when they update it.
Yeah, it was updated.
I did, actually.
It was, like, I think it was through, like, September or October of 97.
So it's probably four or five months.
Yeah, well, that number was really pretty accurate to what we have, and I know we did a fair amount of acquisition this year.
So, you know, if this is going to go in the print, print...
Oh, I'll update it.
You can be sure.
I do have some names.
Steve Watkins.
Yeah, I have his name.
You're my first talk.
I hope to talk to a few people.
Yeah, let's see.
Whose name do I have?
Do I have Watkins' name here?
I think I should have.
Well, Steve Watkins.
Yeah, 582-3793.
I do have his name.
Okay.
There's another person who unfortunately just left, but you probably should talk to him.
And that's John Ober.
John?
B-E-R.
Okay.
And John just, he was on our campus, and we hate to see him go, but he just left the campus to go join a statewide initiative for a state electronic library and interconnecting all our libraries.
So the idea of...
of making electronic resources and the resources of libraries that aren't electronic to cover that issue.
Sure.
Where did he go?
Where would I be able to reach him, do you think?
Is he in California?
He's in California.
The offices are in San Francisco.
I think if you call, I think his e-mail address still may be working here, or if you call to the library and say you're trying to reach John.
Okay.
Well, what I'll do is I'll talk to Steve Watkins, and I'll bet he can connect with you.
Yeah, Steve will know how to get him.
Okay.
John, he just left.
He has to send back a forwarding address.
What was his title?
What was his position?
Well, he was one of the librarians on campus, but now he's going to the California State Library.
Now, do you have a severely limited budget for acquisitions?
Would you say that your acquisitions are limited by...
pardon me, by what you have to spend on books, materials, etc.?
I've been rich and I've been poor and rich is better.
I mean, I think it's a hard, it's hard to say whether, you know, that's a Steve thing.
Okay, I'll talk to him.
He's a faculty member, I would say, when you look at,
The campus is probably underfunded in general.
Higher ed is underfunded.
Higher education in terms of state support and private support.
You know, now it used to be in our system that, you know, 90% of the tuition costs were covered by the state.
Now 70% of it is covered by the state.
So I would hate to say that we don't, you know,
to say that we have enough money, I also don't want to say that I think we don't have enough because in a day-to-day working with students, you know, did you need something?
Were you able to get it?
Yes, they were.
And that's really the bottom line.
Was a resource that was needed for a learner to fulfill an educational goal or outcome available in a timely manner?
You know, it really shifts what we're assessing from how many books are in the library to how many students read something that they needed to learn from.
Chris, traditionally, the library has been perceived as the soul of a university, of a college.
Yeah.
Where kids, you know, I mean, it's not strictly the repository for books.
And I think that's an interesting thing to talk about because of our official constraints.
Our campus doesn't have a student union.
Our campus doesn't have, you know, a library lounge.
You know, back in my days, you went to the Northwestern Library to get dates.
That's right.
When we opened our campus, we didn't even get on the campus for the first couple months.
We had to go in temporary buildings.
We were in elementary schools that had closed on the base with still little chairs.
So the students felt when the campus opened, they finally got into higher education because the chairs were full light.
Because of that, our email system has in many ways
done a lot of the things that traditionally happened in the library lounge or in the student union.
The ride board for sale, announcing events.
We have what we call open forum.
Sometimes it scares the administration's death.
And we've had, you know, a number of both instances of things that have happened on campus.
And it was amazing.
how our electronic access really became the heartbeat.
Again, I remember I'm a product of the 60s.
We closed down campuses.
We didn't blow up banks, but...
And I know that there was, you know, where the students for the Democratic Society met and, you know, where did you run to find out what was happening.
Here, when you hear there's a scandal going on, which we had, you know, a faculty member charged with sexual harassment.
We had a hassle about an incident between some football players from the community college that were living on our campus and some students
when you hear something's happening, you log on to open forum because you wanted to know what's happening.
And just as the students, most of, and I don't get papers handed in.
They get turned in electronically.
Is that right?
And I have students turn things into me in PDF format, and I mark them up on screen and send them back.
And we get, in a sense, jaded.
We're sitting there and somebody has an actual, you know, book or something and they need to write a citation.
It's so much harder when you have to type it all in.
It's so much easier to, you know, be able to clip the citation, you know, from the header of the document that you have.
Sure.
So papers are handed in electronically?
Yes.
And that's also for students who are on campus as well as the distance?
Oh, yeah.
Wow.
I should come out and visit it.
It's a unique environment.
You know, I'm a product of the 60s myself, so it really is a paradigm shift, isn't it, as they say?
Well, and, you know, I don't like necessarily reading from the screen all the time, and we still do a lot of printing, you know, so, you know, sometimes I'll
You know, students will send things electronically, and I'll ask my sister or whatever, say, will you print these things out so I can take them on a plane?
I'm going on a trip.
You know, so it's not universal love, you know.
And I've lost less student papers.
I haven't lost any student papers, but now it's in the electronic folder, and I pack up my words.
And I don't have the problem typically, you know, if the student calls or sends me an e-mail to say, well, your paper's in the office.
But also, you know, it's really funny.
The student turns in his paper at midnight.
And then at 10 o'clock the next morning, they'll send you an email saying, how did you like it?
Like you have nothing else to do, right?
Well, my computer enjoyed it a great deal, but I haven't had the chance to open it and look at it.
Can you describe physically what the library is like?
I mean, is it a place where kids can go in and do their work there, sit down?
We have, there's a computer lab there, and there's study carols.
It looks like any other library.
It has stacks.
and then it has some other places where there are access terminals to information.
The Chronicle of Higher Education said, I guess you have seven computer centers, is that right, on the campus?
Well, I think, yeah, in terms of, again, in terms of the library, for library research, you know, a lot of times students are doing library research without being in the library because any of the labs that have the computer can go onto the library and search our database.
There's only a few of the indices.
There's some indices because of...